---
layout: post
title: i4100 installation
tags: ['linux']
category: 'blog'
---

*This information is provided to let you know how I configured my laptop
to work with Linux; it is provided with no warranty at all under any
circumstances. If you break your laptop trying anything listed below
don't whine at me about it.*

That said, if you have anything constructive to contribute to this information let me know at <nicholas@nicholasstudt.com>.

## My Configuration

This is the hardware that my Inspiron 4100 has inside of it. Yours, of
course, could be configured differently. 

 * Pentium&reg;III Processor, 1.0 GHz
 * 14\.1 SXGA+ TFT Display
 * ATI 16MB Video ( ATI Radeon M )
 * 256MB, SDRAM, 2DIMMs
 * 20 GB Ultra ATA Hard Drive
 * Modular Floppy Drive
 * Integrated Network Card
 * Internal 56k Modem
 * 24X Max Variable CD-ROM Drive
 * Internal miniPCI Dell TrueMobile 1150 Wireless Networking (Wi-Fi Certified)
 * 59 WHr Lithium-Ion Battery

Overall I am very pleased with this laptop. Under Redhat 9 everything
works correctly out of the box, unlike previous versions of redhat. Of
course good things come to those who wait. ;)

## PCMCIA

No hassle with this, automatically detected correctly.

    PCMCIA=yes
    PCIC=yenta_socket
    PCIC_OPTS=
    CORE_OPTS=

## Suspend to Disk / Hibernate

Got around to getting suspend to disk working. All that was needed was
following the instructions on dell's support site ([Dell Support
Page](http://support.dell.com/us/en/kb/document.asp?DN=1021633) this
link may not work, the title of the document is "How do I recreate the
Suspend to Disk (S2D), or Save-to-Disk, file or partition on a Dell?
Inspiron? portable computer?"  this is part of the "Knowledge Base" ).
They type of partition is "OS/2 hidden C: drive" and run the s2d utility
from dell. Pretty easy and it mostly works.  Sometimes it does not
resume or locks completely on resume and I believe this to be a problem
with apm and the kernel and not in the hardware itself.

*Update:* The seemingly random problems with resume were nothing
wrong with linux, the kernel or apm, and I strongly suspect the same
thing happens with other operating systems as well. The crux of the
matter is the button on the front of the laptop triggers an unsuspend.
Couple this with a laptop bag that allows this button to be hit while
in transit and you have a laptop that suspends and unsuspends several
times while it is in the bag, which makes things mildly unhappy. Yea,
it took me a while to figure this one out ;) The solution is to get a
bag that does not do this...

## XFree86

Redhat 9's X setup on install correctly identifies both the chipset and
the panel. It just works. Including GL and DRI.

The rest of this section is for historic purposes.

Good news, XFree86 4.2.0 is out and supports this chipset. Also of note
RedHat has released new XFree86 rpms, version 4.1.0-15, they appear to
have back ported the fixes for the radeon support so that works as well
now. Here is the [config file](/media/2001/11/i4100-XF86Config-4). The
3d stuff doesn't work in Redhat's release and I haven't tried 4.2.0 yet.

This configuration allows the screen to run at 1400x1050, not bad
running at a Depth of 24.

Some related information if this doesn't work for you can be found on the XFree86.org's Xpert list, particularly in [November 2001](http://www.xfree86.org/pipermail/xpert/2001-November/thread.html). Or possibly in the message from [Micheal Clark](http://www.xfree86.org/pipermail/xpert/2001-November/012775.html) that contained the tar ball and the XF86Config that I was using.

## Sound

Sound is correctly identified and works flawlessly under Redhat 9, the
rest of this section is left for historic purposes.

Under the 2.4.9-12 ( Redhat 8 ) kernel rpm the sound seems to work, sort
of.  <i>sndconfig</i> seems to work with the newer kernel and assigns
the sound card as such in modules.conf.

    alias sound-slot-0 i810_audio
    post-install sound-slot-0 /bin/aumix-minimal -f /etc/.aumixrc -L &gt;/dev/null 2&gt;&amp;1 || :
    pre-remove sound-slot-0 /bin/aumix-minimal -f /etc/.aumixrc -S &gt;/dev/null 2&gt;&amp;1 || :

There does seem to be some playback problem though. Some applications do
not play sound correctly, through this module. I got around most of this
problem by running [esd](http://freshmeat.net/projects/esound/) and sending the
sound that way. The only real noticeable application that I haven't
found a fix for is flash, everyone sounds like Alvin and the Chipmunks.
This is due to a bug in the i810 driver in this version of the kernel.
It is fixed in 2.4.9-21 from redhat but it has a nasty problem of
hard-locking the machine if you stop the audio stream from a wav or from
flash. 

## Internal Ethernet
	
The internal ethernet (10/100) comes across as eth0 and will run using
the 3c59x driver from a stock kernel. Nothing special required, it uses
*eth0*.

## Wireless

*Note:* Save yourself some time and use the GUI tool provided by Redhat. 
	
The internal wireless card is actually run off of the pcmcia slots.
Therefore, just set up your network in /etc/pcmcia/wireless.opts, define
the network configuration in /etc/syscongfig/network-scripts/ifcfp-eth1
and off you go.  The first couple of octects from the cards mac, this
may be different for you, is 00:02:2D.  Oh yea, in case you missed the
not obvious reference it uses *eth1*.

## Internal Modem

I am almost positive that this is a WinModem, but have not investigated
because I don't currently have dialup access anywhere.  Broadband for
me all the time ( woot ! ).

I have recieved some information that there are drivers for the modem,
haven't had an account to test it out on but here's the
[link](http://www.mbsi.ca/cnxtlindrv/hsf/index.html).  

## USB

USB works flawlessly, I finally got a USB based printer to test against.

## /sbin/hdparm
	
hdparm is your friend to the end, it makes laptops happy. Here are the
options that I put in /etc/rc.d/rc.local, it makes the drive speed
along.  The second lines seems to make the drive even happier, but as I
just found it I am keeping the old line around. Just in case.

<pre>
/sbin/hdparm -d 1 -c 3 -m 16 /dev/hda
</pre>

<pre>
/sbin/hdparm -X udma5 -S 240 -d1 -u1 -m16 -c3 /dev/hda
</pre>

## That little *E* Button

That little *E* button is keycode 129. You can map this with
xmodmap by putting "keycode 129 = F22" into .Xmodmap and then restarting
X. If you are on a Redhat System, like I am, this will be read
automagicly. You can use your window manager to map the key at this
point. And viola, you now have a mapped *E* button.

