---
layout: post
title: i600m Installation
tags: ['linux']
---

*This information is provided to let you know how I configured my laptop
to work with Linux; it is provided with no warranty at all under any
circumstances. If you break your laptop trying anything listed below
don't whine at me about it.*

## Important Note about Fedore Core 1 vs Redhat 9
	
I have replaced Redhat 9 with Fedora Core 1 on this laptop. To my great
pleasure everything works with the exception of the internal wireless
card. The only modification that was needed was to add "acpi=on" to the
gurb configuration. Unless you have some insatiable desire to hurt, this
is likely a better solution.

## General Notes
		
I have installed Redat 9 on this laptop. This of course means I will be
assuming a Redhat 9 installation here and will mention the portions I
had to manipulate to get the laptop functioning.
		
Almost everything on this laptop has "just worked" by default in Redhat
9. The notable exceptions include the internal wireless card, detailed
below, as well as power management. I did have to recompile the kernel
to gain acpi power management.  So far I am very pleased with this
laptop. 

## My Configuration
	
The following is the listing of the parts of the 600m that I purchased.
Yours of course may be different.

 * I600M,14.1 IN SXGA+,1.4 GHZ,W/32MB VID
 * 384MB,DDR,266MHZ 2 DIMMS,I600M
 * 30GB HARD DRIVE, I600M 30GBPP
 * RESOURCE - CD WITH TOOLS
 * INTERNAL 56K MDM AND NIC
 * 8X DVD DRIVE,I600M
 * INTEL PRO 2100 MINIPCI WIRELESS CARD,INS
 * 48W PRIMARY BATTERY I600M
 * 48W ADDITIONAL BATTERY I600M

## XFree86
		
XFree86 version 4.3.0 is set up correctly during the install. I have
included the configuration file I am using. It is important to note that
I don't use XFS so if you are this file will have to be adjusted a bit. 
		
DRI seems to work with the stock Redhat kernel, unfortunately this must
be rebuilt to get acpi working correctly. 
		
Current [XF86Config](/media/2003/05/i600m-XF86Config) configuration file.

## Sound
		
lspci reports the sound card as <i>Intel Corp. 82801DB AC'97 Audio (rev
01)</i>. The i810_audio module works flawlessly, so far.

## Kernel
	
In order to get ACPI working the kernel needed to be recompiled. I got
the latest stable kernel ([2.4.21](http://www.kernel.org)) and the
corresponding ACPI patch from [acpi.sf.net](http://acpi.sf.net).  Here
is the [config file](/media/2003/05/i600m-kernel-config-2.4.21) I
arrived at after many attempts.

I am currently working on changing the DSDT the kernel uses, none of the
attempts thus far have resulted in the batteries listing their
information correctly. They show 47950 mW vs 48000 mW.

## PCMCIA
		
PCMCIA works without any changes using "yenta_socket".

## Power Management

Since rebuilding the kernel ACPI handles power management quite well. I
do not have hibernate set up yet and will likely use the software
suspend kernel path. 

## Internal Ethernet
		
The ethernet device is detected correctly using the "tg3" module.  The
following line was added on install to the modules.conf file.

<pre>
alias eth0 tg3
</pre>

## Wireless
	
This is an Intel Pro 2100 mini-pci card. This unfortunately contains the
Broadcom chipset. It is not currently supported. I am using a pcmcia
wireless card until this device is supported.

## USB

USB just works by default. The following lines were added to the
modules.conf on install.

<pre>
alias usb-controller ehci-hcd
alias usb-controller1 usb-uhci
</pre>

## Disk

I purchased the 30 GB drive as I didn't need the extra space or
particularly care about the disk performance, it is a laptop after all.
The following is the hdparm information from the drive.
		
Currently I am using the following hdparm line, this is not the best
performance this drive has seen. When running the Redhat kernels the
drive performed slightly better, this is due to the patch for some new
ID's that the original kernel had vs 2.4.21.  It's not enough for me to
track this patch down currently.

<pre>
/sbin/hdparm -X udma5 -S 240 -d1 -u1 -m16 -c3 /dev/hda
</pre>

