---
layout: post
title: Installing ruby, rake, and jekyll
tags: ['*nix']
category: 'blog'
---

This is how to install rbev, rake, and jekyll on an OS X, or \*nix,
machine to create a local testing version of your jekyll based website.
The process was pretty simple once I stopped trying to deal with the
local system ruby. 

## Install rbenv

Pull both the rbenv and ruby-build source.

    git clone git://github.com/sstephenson/rbenv.git ~/.rbenv
    git clone git://github.com/sstephenson/ruby-build.git \
	    ~/.rbenv/plugins/ruby-build

Update your bash to include rbev and local gem files.

    echo 'export PATH="$HOME/.rbenv/bin:$HOME/.gem/ruby/1.9.1/bin/:$PATH"' \
	     >> ~/.bash_profile
    echo 'eval "$(rbenv init -)"' >> ~/.bash_profile

Actually install ruby and change the global ruby, if you don't do this
today you should probably [pick a newer version](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/downloads/).

    rbenv install 1.9.3-p327
    rbenv global  1.9.3-p327

## Install jekyll

    $ gem install --user-install rake
    $ gem install --user-install jekyll

Assuming all of this completed successfully you should now have a system
with a working version of jekyll, rake, and ruby that is independant of
the system ruby.

## The Payoff

    $ git clone git@github.com:nicholasstudt/nicholasstudt.com.git
	$ cd nicholasstudt.com
	$ rake preview

Visit <http://localhost:8080>[^neverworks] to view a local version of the site. Yes,
I know, jekyll defaults to port 4000 but 8080 calls to me like a siren song.

[^neverworks]: This just never seems to work on my ipad for some reason. ☹
